Ground green MP based in the
Right. So,
um, Roberton, we have 10 minutes for you.
Take your submission as read, but I'll speak to it
and the 10 minutes is yours
and you might like to leave time for questions.
Thank you. Uh, so thank you Mr. O'Connor, members
of the petitions, uh, select committee for the opportunity
for me to speak
and respond to the submissions against my petition
from Hospitality New Zealand and clubs New Zealand.
My name is Bob Robertson.
I'm the petition author for requiring license premises
to display drink prices, sizes, and alcohol content.
I'm simply a consumer.
Before I begin the detail, I want
to explain why this petition matters.
New Zealanders increasingly want
and expect to make clearer more responsible choices
about what they drink.
Social drinking habits are changing
more New Zealanders are moderating their intake.
Low and no alcohol options are a fast growing part
of the market, and people are more conscious
about what's in their glass.
But while a supermarket bottle shows you exactly
how much alcohol contains that clarity disappears.
The moment you step into a bar,
you can't always tell if the pint you've ordered is 4 25
milliliters or 568 milliliters,
or if a beer you've selected is 4% or 7%,
or indeed how much it costs information, genuine
informed choice isn't possible.
So my petition is simple targeted requests for transparency.
It asks for consistency
by having all unlicensed premises such as pubs, bars,
and clubs clearly display for draft beer, cider,
and wine sold by the glass.
Four pieces of key information, the drink name,
the serving size, the alcohol by volume,
and the GST inclusive price.
This would be a small meaningful step ensuring everyone,
staff included, knows exactly what's being poured at
what strength and at what cost.
Currently, practices vary widely.
Some venues do display prices, others don't serving.
They don't serving.
Sizes differ and many staff don't know the
A BV of what they're selling.
That's the alcohol by volume.
The Ministry of Justice has even confirmed
that this information is not always displayed
for alcohol served on premise.
Staff shouldn't have to guess
and customers shouldn't have to ask repeatedly
for the same basic information.
A clear display makes things easier and fair for both sides.
The practicalities are straightforward.
Venues already know the details,
they just need to display them.
Clearly. It could be on a chalkboard printed
list or a digital menu.
Updated whenever products or prices change.
The Ministry of Justice has confirmed that one,
alcohol content can already be required
under existing regulation making powers,
and two, displaying price
and volume could be added easily through a short amendment
to Section 4 0 1 A of the sale
and supply of Alcohol Act 2012.
This is incremental rather than disruptive.
It touches a limited set of products,
uses information venues already have,
can be displayed using the boards
and menus they already use,
and can be checked alongside existing licensing inspections.
It fits the pattern of small practical improvements.
New Zealand tends to favor now
to the industry responses.
So hospitality New Zealand acknowledges the petition,
but argues legislation is unnecessary
because in its words, most venues already do this in some,
some shape or form.
Clubs NZ goes further
and characterizes the petition as unnecessary, impractical
and not clearly linked to proven harm minimization outcomes.
Relying heavily on staff customer interaction
as the primary way information is provided.
They contend that information on a BV size
and price is readily ready,
readily available via trained staff.
And that additional regulation would simply add cost
complexity and red tape.
In my experience as a consumer,
many venues happily provide signage providing the
information I'm requesting.
So additional cost complexity
and red tape doesn't appear to be an issue for them.
Where a venue doesn't provide signage, my experience is
that bar staff often don't know the A
BV or the serving size.
This directly challenges the assumption
that staff interaction reliably,
reliably provides accurate information
and underscores my point, my core points.
That information should be transparently available without
needing to rely on staff knowledge or initiative.
The industry lobby group's insistence on a strict harm
minimization test also overlooks drink driving risk.
If a customer unintentionally consumes more alcohol than
they realize because key information wasn't displayed,
there are obvious safety and legal implications.
At a minimum, it raises a fairness question,
is it reasonable to place the entire responsibility on the
customer when the venue chose not to make basic volume
and a BV information visible?
My intention is to assist the committee by clarifying
that this is a targeted low burden transparency measure
designed to address clear and widespread information, gaps
and inconsistencies with real harm minimization benefits
At its heart, the petition rests on a clear principle
transparency and the ability to make an informed choice
of basic consumer rights.
In almost every other consumer context,
new Zealanders are entitled
to clear upfront information about
what they are buying on-premise.
Alcoholic drinks should be, should not be an exception.
Both hospitality New Zealand
and clubs New Zealand emphasize
that information is available through menus,
chalkboards and staff.
But these practices aren't standardized
and vary from venue to venue.
There's no consistent reliable way
to know the actual core size, the price
or a BV for draft products and wine sold sold by the glass.
Some venues list prices, but not volumes.
Some list names without a BV requiring customers
to ask every time introduces friction
and assumes a uniform level of staff training
and product knowledge that is neither required by law
nor achieved consistently across the sector.
A basic legible tariff for AFI set of products,
compliments host responsibility by giving staff
and customers a shared accurate reference point.
Something many establishments already choose
to provide clubs.
NZ contends
that any additional regulations be clearly linked
to proven harm minimization outcomes.
And that my proposal doesn't meet that test.
My petition does explicitly note
that visible A BVN serving site information can support more
mindful consumption and help people better track their
intake, which will help drivers avoiding
drinking above the legal limit.
The primary rationale is consumer information
and transparency, enabling informed choice
in almost every other consumer context, packaged food
and drink retail unit pricing.
New Zealand law already recognizes that people are entitled
to clear upfront information about what they are buying.
Applying the same principle
to an on-premise pause is a modest extension
of existing consumer protection norms.
It shouldn't be necessary for consumers
to guess whether a pint is 4 25 mil or 5 68 mil,
or to rely on memory
and staffed recall
to understand whether one tap beer is substantially stronger
than another, even if the committee were
to place less weight on the harm reduction benefits.
The case for basic standardized transparency in this narrow
area remains strong.
So let me turn to the practicality and compliance burden.
Both industry submissions characterize my position
as impractical and burden burdensome.
We've heard that before when New Zealand introduced a
smoking ban in bars and restaurants,
similar worries were raised that it couldn't be enforced
and it would harm business.
Today that change is recognized as one
of the most beneficial professionalizing steps
ever taken for hospitality.
Transparency and professionalism usually proved
good for business two.
The petition file requires only four data points per item.
The name, the serving size, the A BV and the price.
Using flexible formats that venues already
commonly employ chalkboards, printed lists,
posters, or digital screens.
The information itself is neither complex nor novel.
Venues already know what they're pouring beside
what size glass they're using, what they charge,
and they receive AB information from suppliers.
The petition simply asks
that they display information they already possess in a
clear and consistent way, way.
Club NZ points out that a BV volume
and other details are already required on bottles and cans,
and that responsibility
for accuracy properly sits with the producer.
My petition is entirely consistent with that framework.
It doesn't seek to move responsibility from for,
for determining a BV to venues,
but to ensure that when the same product is served on tap
or by the glass, the essential information consumers take
for granted in in its package, package form is not lost.
Similarly, in the petition doesn't claim
that United Kingdom measures can be lift lifted
wholesale into New Zealand.
Rather it cites them to demonstrate
that requiring clear display of serving size
and a BV for common POS is both workable
and accepted in comparable jurisdictions.
So let me clarify some alleged ambiguities.
Uh, Mr. Roberton, just where you, your 10 minutes is now
very close to being asked.
Got, if you wanted to leave time for questions,
I'm just, I'm just giving you that.
Sure, sure. I, I, I'll, I didn't let, I'll
Speed up. So,
clubs NZ raises concerns about terms such as new,
new normal viewing distance, manageable number of items
and updates in a timely manner,
suggesting these would create enforcement difficulties.
These are common concepts in existing regulatory practice
and can be clarified in regulations for guidance.
For example, new normal viewing distance can be aligned
with existing signage requirements.
The select committee may also note
that the petition intentionally avoids over-prescribing
formats precisely to give venues flexibility.
The requirement is outcome focus
information should be legible
and conspicuous at the point of decision
for the relevant products rather than prescriptive.
In conclusion, taken together,
the industry submissions confirm an important point.
There is currently no national requirement
or standard that ensures
that disinformation is displayed in a consistent way.
In practice. Approaches differ widely
between venues and license types.
My petition proposes a practical remedy
that lines on-premise service of common pause
with existing expectations for packaged goods using tools
and formats already familiar to the sector.
It enhances consumer choice,
supports more mindful consumption in line
with changing social drinking trend trends
and reduces reliance on
variable staff knowledge while imposing only at modest
and proportionate compliance requirement.
And for these reasons, the committee is respectfully invited
to view the petition not as an onerous new regulatory layer,
but as a targeted common sense transparency measure
that addresses clear information gaps
and inconsistencies in the current environment.
So thank you very much for the opportunity
for me to speak and I'm welcome.
Any questions you might have?
Well, I've got time, very brief time questions
because I'm just sure.
Aware that there are other items of business to follow you.
Um, you said yours as targeted.
Um, it's actually quite broad ranging number
of requirements, which one, given
you've obviously looked at this,
which is the most important one
because I mean the alcohol by volume,
but alcohol by volume by far You would see that
as if as Absolutely.
Okay. And if it was,
and the others obviously the size of the glass
and various other things, but that's, yeah.
And they're all, so your petition really is about Yep,
because I is about knowing is the alcohol,
my body, the strength of the drink,
The strength of what you're drinking,
and actually they're all equally important to be honest.
But, uh, the strength
and the price, I would say,
how much are you paying for this?
The alcohol by volume. So I can just say the interesting
thing about that is that that could be done
through res right from the, um, the, the, um, ministry
of Justice, um, report said that's the one part
that doesn't require legislative change
that can be just done by order. And council,
I, I'm looking at the situation two where one of the,
you'll see in the submissions from, um,
I think it's in clubs, New Zealand, they talk about you give
so much information, it actually almost becomes overload
and meaningless because I'm looking at places
that have maybe 10 different or maybe more wines on display.
Um, and that would then require to have the alcohol
by volume for each of those wines.
Yes. The drinks that were in the Yes.
Isn't there a danger though, that actually you think
that if you had so much information,
it actually it becomes a little meaningless?
I don't think so. Well, not meaningless is
that overload? No,
Not slight. I
mean, we all d don't we, we go to pubs
and we have, so often you have the, you have the, uh,
the menu in front of you and it has the wine list at the
back and it's, and it's quite common for the wine to,
to have, it's not only its price, but it's serving,
but also the a BV next to it.
It's all the information very
Quickly. Um,
Presumably you wouldn't need against each kind of wine
to have the serving size unless they were different.
I mean, you'd typically have all
of the white wines would be the same.
So Yeah, that's fine. Isn't you wouldn't need
to have it against each other as
Long as it's specified some, Yeah.
As long as it's some, yeah.
And I have to say many places do.
Absolutely. Absolutely they
Do. But I wasn't surprised
coming from the UK
that a pint was not a pint. Oh,
It, it's sono to me it's sono
that they can call it a pint.
It's not a pint at all. Mm-hmm.
Very, very spirited and well informed, um, um, submission.
So thank you very much. Thank you.
Um, and as I say, we've uh, we have to keep moving it. Uh,
So this will be done in the next couple of weeks, will it?
Yeah, yeah. Probably on Friday.
Fantastic. Thanks for your time. Thank
You. Thank you.
Um, ministry of Justice. Thank you.
You're welcome to remain here too, Ms. Robinson.
Alright, thank you. You can take your submission as read,
but uh, obviously you'd like to hear to it
and, uh, time for questions.
Fantastic. Thank you Mr. Chair.
Um, I think to the committee for having us here today.
Um, and thank you to the petitioner
and um, to the submitters
for engaging in this key democratic process.
My name is Patrick ua.
I'm a policy advisor at the Ministry of Justice,
and this is Lisa Harris, who's the manager for the victims
and Harm reduction team.
Um, as I say, we are the Ministry of Justice
and we are responsible and we aren't alone the Ministry
of Justice, but here to represent them.
Um, we are responsible for administering sale by Alcohol Act
and its regulations.
So we can, uh, be here to discuss how the proposals
and the petition might be implemented in that context.
Uh, and there's just a couple of key points
that we'll go over in our submission
before we open up for questions.
And I guess to the first point, um, a lot of the issues, um,
which this petition raises the interest
and responsibility for them sit across
other government agencies.
So the merits on this proposal in terms
of its public health impacts are better
set with the Ministry of Health.
Um, the implications for food standards
and product labeling, uh, with primary industries
and, uh, merits on requiring businesses, uh,
to display pricing information better set with the Ministry
for Business Innovation and Employment.
So as I say here to speak to the petition proposal
and how it might be implemented in alcohol law.
Um, and so as noted, uh, in the petitioner's um,
speaking stock, there's a, there's a few key points
of information, uh, that asks, uh, that the petition asks
that on license holders must display.
The first obviously is alcohol content
or A BV as it as it was referred to.
And that is a fairly straightforward change
that could be given effect to through regulations.
The ACT already provides for a regulation making power for
that specific, uh, detail at section 4 0 1 A of the act, uh,
the further points about price volume, name of the drug,
that's not quite as straightforward.
And so in our submission, uh, we presented two options
that you might want to consider first being amending the act
so that there's a regulation making power similar to the one
that exists there already, but for those different, uh,
pieces of information
or there's directly inserting those requirements into
the primary legislation.
And out of those two options we would prefer the first gives
a bit more flexibility and those details don't necessarily
need to sit, sit in the primary ledge.
Um, and lastly, there's just one additional matter
that we thought would raise for the committee's attention
and that might be, um, you consider which type
of licenses this, the proposals in this petition might apply
to if it was implemented.
Um, we talk about a consumption in,
in an onsite environment, um, and there's also club licenses
and onsite special licenses which kind
of have that environment.
So as well as on licenses you might consider them.
Um, our understanding is that alcohol rum off licenses, um,
must already display information about alcohol
content, um, and volume.
So that's the things you might see on the labeling in
accordance with product labeling requirements.
And we also understand that most off licenses generally
display display prices to inform consumer choice anyway.
Um, so that's just another matter
that we thought you might want to consider.
Um, but that's it from us
and we are happy to take any questions you might have.
Oh, thank you. Um,
Yes.
Um, cord, can I just, um, just check, I think,
I think I got there in the end.
I just had to read it a couple of times.
Um, the,
the, uh, the regulations would, we heard what I said to,
to Bob is that, is that correct?
That understanding? That's right. Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
So under, under current regulations,
it could be premises could be required across the country to
uh, show a BV, um,
but they couldn't under existing regulations be required
to show volume or price.
So that regulation doesn't exist currently,
but there's a regulation making power in the act.
So the government would have to agree to recommend
that the Governor General make those regulations.
Okay. But the, but the regulation making power in the act
only extends so far as to alcohol content.
That's not a volume nor price that thank you
Is we're Trying, trying to understand what,
what, I mean if you know that it's 5% one,
one drink is 5%
and another drink is 15%, then you know you can have three
times as much of the first is the second
Alcohol. If you
Dunno the volume, if you dunno the volume, how is
that alcohol by volume useful?
Well, that's a good question
and that's something you may want
to consider putting in your report.
Yeah. But yeah, in terms of the merits
of which you would like to include
and in that, um, we can speak to how you can do that.
It seems that some things are, I mean the price I think is
going to vary quite a lot
and there'll be specials and things like that.
And I do get, there's a point about value for money,
but I think that's not the most critical,
but the most critical bit is how much total alcohol
or consuming by the Yeah, if you like the number of drinks.
So yeah, I mean, I'm just going through the,
you know, the dry January and things like that
and um, some people are very purist about it
and some people are quite happy
to take the less than 5.5% things like that.
And it's a real pain we have to ask.
Thank you. Alright. No other questions? Alright.
Uh, so that's, that's quite uh,
and that was why I asked the question about priority.
'cause one, it's one of these things a little bit easier to
deal with than a solve than two of the others.
So it's good that you were able to, to,
to prioritize in which one we don't have all the ocean.
Just take one step of time. Alright, thank you Vicky.
Alright, thank you.
And we have, uh, online, um, we have pubs of New Zealand.
We,
Here we go. Ah,
yes. Uh, Ms. Mor Waterous, water. Water,
Waterous. Yes.
Waterous. Waterous. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, good afternoon.
Uh, and thank you for the opportunity to to speak today.
Uh, obviously my name's Lucy Waters
and I am Chief Executive of Clubs New Zealand.
Uh, we represent around 300 not-for-profit
clubs across the country.
Uh, and these include community clubs,
cosmopolitan clubs, and RSAs.
Uh, so as noted you,
you've already received our written
submission and that's read.
Uh, so I do intend to keep my comments, uh, quite brief
and focused today.
Uh, firstly, I do wanna acknowledge the petitioner's intent.
Uh, I think, you know, for, for all of us wanting consumers
to have clear information about what they're buying, um, is
of course a, a reasonable aspiration.
Uh, however, while the intention is there, uh, the mechanism
that has been proposed is in clubs, new Zealand's view,
unnecessary and out of step with
how licensed venues actually operate.
Uh, from our perspective, the court issues are very simple.
Uh, the information the petition seeks,
so price serving size A BV
as we we discussed are readily available.
And venues, staff are trained
to answer these questions pop promptly and accurately.
Uh, and many venues already have some form of signage,
whether in chalkboards, printed menus or digital screens.
Um, probably our biggest concern that, that,
that we raised within our submission is
that we are hearing from, uh, reporting agencies
that they are already sub stretched, uh,
when it comes to compliance.
Uh, and so adding another factor into the compliance mix is
just gonna put extra burden on our reporting
agencies across the country.
Um, it is our belief that regulating extensive signage
to duplicate information that's already easily easy
to obtain, adds no real value to consumers, uh,
and may actually reduce that meaningful engagement
between staff and customers.
Uh, you'll note in our submission, we asked a number
of questions, uh,
and provide a com commentary around the practicality
of the proposal, uh, such as clubs operate multiple bars.
Would signage be required at every service point?
Some offer table service?
Would signage need to be visible from every table?
Uh, product lists are reg, uh, regularly rotated,
which would require constant updating of signage or menus
or printed material.
Um, and as I said, the licensing inspectors, police
and medical officers of health are already managing
substantial compliance workload.
Uh, you'll note in our submission, we raise concerns, uh,
that this proposal might actually
reduce meaningful engagement between staff
and customers, which is a con critical part
of responsible service.
Uh, actually encouraging a conversation about price,
about size, about A BV is often the best way for staff to,
to assess a customer and, and if necessary intervene.
Um, for host responsibility,
these are important customer touch points, uh,
that are built into those host responsibility practices.
It's part of the training that they undergo with, um,
server wise and, and their duty manager training.
Uh, so as I've said, clubs, New Zealand believes
that this information is already easily accessible.
Staff engagement is often more effective than signage
and implementing the process would add cost confusion
and compliance pressure without
clear evidence-based benefit.
Thank you.
Alright, thank you.
Um, do those,
the pubs of New Zealand mm-hmm.
Do, do you have policy
advice to your clubs?
Yes. For example, so, so you, and
and part of that policy advice, do you advise
that they should make around this, particularly the matter
of volume, alcohol by volume, that they should make that
as available as possible?
I'm just thinking of clubs that I know of that most
of the bowsers or the display have a 4%
or a 4.5%, 5.2 on them.
Yes. Is that as a result of policy
or is that just right down to
That? That is
provided by, and my understanding is that is
provided by the, the breweries when they, um,
put their beers on the tap.
So it's part of their signage
requirements from the breweries.
Okay. So Right. So, but that, but
Um, but yes, we, we, we absolutely discuss with our clubs,
uh, the importance of staff training
and making sure that staff understand, um, about the A BV,
uh, that is a critical component of, um, harm minimization
and host responsibility training.
And what about the other thing
that came up about standardization of glasses?
And that's one of the things that, um, certain submitted,
Mr. Robertson brought Yes.
You quite, and I know that's a very real thing
that a a pint is, is a pint is a pint.
Um, and um, is not a pint, it's not a pint,
it's not a pint not Yeah.
That, that, that is, I know we should all the ads say we
shouldn't be playing booze maths.
Um, but um, that not, not, no. And
It could be. Yes. Uh, look,
it, it would, um, the, the differing sizes
of, of what is a pint would definitely be a, a point
of discussion across clubs, um, across the country.
Uh, but the, the club will have, its, its glasses
and staff will be aware of of what those, what the volume
of each of those glasses are.
Perhaps we should have consumer New Zealand
here as far as that one.
Sorry. Any other questions?
Yeah, just, um, clarifying question.
Kda Lucy, um, thank you for both written
and your oral submission.
Just given the fact that you're saying it appears
to be a regulation, uh, on the breweries, it'd be good
to actually confirm that isn't, what is that regulation?
Where's it coming from to uh,
when they provide the, I guess the kegs?
Mm-hmm. I mean at this stage we're only talking about beer,
but I think this is probably more of the issue
because, you know, guess 90% of wine has the same Yeah.
Same alcohol content. Um, is what, what, what's the incident
of of non-compliance of that?
I mean, if that is required, uh, across your 300 clubs,
have you got any estimate as to as to
how many are not then essentially providing
what the petitioner is asking for in terms
of a BV information?
I wouldn't have that off the, off the top of my head.
So as, as I said, it's clubs, clubs don't determine
what the A BV is when they,
when they purchase a product from a brewery
or a winery, uh, it's, it's, the onus is on the,
those suppliers to, to provide
that information in the same way that if you, you buy a box
of cereal from the supermarket, they,
the nutritional information, information is, is
provided by the manufacturer.
Yeah, no, I mean my question is more, um, h how many,
how many clubs are not showing the
Information That the,
That they'd all be showing the information that's, that's
provided by the breweries on, on their, so their taps.
Right. So to that point,
'cause the chair was asking the petitioner if we could only
do one of the three things,
which would be his request was for a BV.
If, if that was to happen, if
that regulation within the legislation was to be adjusted,
that doesn't sound like it would have really
any impact on any of the clubs. They've already No.
Yeah, if they, if they've already got their,
their bare pourers, uh, they're being
provided the artwork, then it's, it's very easy for them
to update those beer, those beer pourers.
Thank you. Yeah. Can, can I just clarify, I think it,
it's, it's not regulated that the alcohol providers do that.
They just do it. It's, well
That's, that was the question I asked before.
We don't know, but they're not, we should find that out.
Alright, so, so
The question, unless he's saying that they do do it,
so we won, our question is are they doing it out
of the goodness of their brewing hearts or are they,
To be honest, I'm, I'm not a hundred percent sure if it's,
if it's regulation or not.
The ministry would be aware of if there's any
regulation over the providers to pro.
I wouldn't imagine. So that probably law.
Um, but it could well be in the food standards code.
Right, right, right.
Please thank you. Because I mean, I'm just thinking
that usually because I must admit I'm someone
that does look at what the percentage is if I'm, um,
always looking for the lowest.
Of course once Upon a time it was different.
Yeah. Wow.
It used to be everything was 4% in New Zealand
and now every 5%.
Now that's essentially. I
Did have a question, Lucy, if I may.
Um, thank you. And just noting that wine,
it may be usually 1113, but it can go from five
and half to 20%.
Um, and of course you've got the low alcohol wines mm-hmm.
Which are more difficult to find than one would like.
Do your clubs mostly have, um, I mean given you,
we are talking one standard unit and things like that.
Do they have standard glasses?
I mean, and would you be likely to have different amounts?
I mean, do you have more in a red wine pour
and less in a white wine pour or
Norm? Normally a
pore is, is, is standard.
So they'll, the, the clubs will have their glasses.
They, they purchase those from, um,
wherever they purchase them from a little mark on,
they've got the marks on them so that they know what,
what the PO is.
Yeah, that's quite useful.
Could you just remind us if you know offhand
and if not, send us through what is that standard
marked volume?
'cause I think that would be useful to know.
I dunno it off the top of my head,
but we can certainly find out.
And I was a barmaid in another country far too long,
so long I won't be able to help either.
Alright, We'll watch the return.
So we, Um, alright, look.
Well thank you very much, uh, members.
And look, thank you for this has been, um, this is
what the petitions committee, we, we enjoy um, these types
of petitions because they do really give us
the opportunity to dig deep.
And we may well, when we have a discussion here, look
for some more information so
that we can make a meaningful recommendation on this.
So thank you for those sort of the ministry, um,
and for the clubs of New Zealand.
Thank you. Uh, Mr.
Roberton, thank you very much for, um mm-hmm.
Making, bringing life to the, uh, petition.
And I'll be heading off to the Johnsonville Club tonight.